docs: 📝 Writing up a learning short for GitHub Actions (#238)
seedcase-project/seedcase-project: learn/shorts/intro-gh-actions.qmd

  of things that you'd rather a computer do that you do manually.
author: "Luke W. Johnston"
date: "2024-05-21"
date-modified: last-modified
categories: 
  - github actions
  - automation
  - servers
  - workflows
---

## Motivation for this micro-lesson

-   In our team, and in programming or software development in general,
    we often need to frequently run code every time a specific event
    happens (like someone makes changes to code) or we want to automate
    a task that needs to happen on a regular basis. To do that, we need
    to use tools that make it easier to automate those tasks. This
    lesson aims to share our knowledge on using one of these tools
    called [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions).

## Assumed knowledge of reader

-   No knowledge of any specific software or programming language is
    needed, including Git.
-   A general understanding of what "automation" means and answering
    questions like:
    -   How might a computer (conceptually) do a task for you, instead
        of you doing it manually?
    -   How could you (conceptually) get a computer to do a task for you

>         on a schedule or based on a trigger or event?

Author: I'm not sure what you mean either 😛 what aren't you sure about?

>         on a schedule or based on a trigger or event?

Reviewer: @lwjohnst86 E.g., not sure what it means to "**conceptually** understand how a computer **might do a task** for someone"? :)

>         on a schedule or based on a trigger or event?

Author: Hmm, I do see the line you commented on, I am not sure what you aren't understanding or  asking. Maybe let's start with: What is it that you think it means?

>         on a schedule or based on a trigger or event?

Reviewer: I think I know where you're going, but my confusion it twofold, I think:

- The wording "(conceptually)" and "might do" confuses me. It might be bc I know how it's done *practically* that I'm confused about the notion how to understand it **conceptually** only? As a reader I'm left with a feeling of "what do they **specifically** expect me to know here?"
- I'm also not sure why they are phrased as questions and not just statements like the rest of the list?

I think it means something in line with that the reader should understand something about that computers can do things for them (like renaming a file using the Terminal or a script, maybe, so they don't have to click on it an rename it?). And that it's not just when they "ask" it to do it (like running a command or a script), but also e.g., at specific times of day or at specific "events"? 

But it's not the hill I want to die on ⛰️  This PR has already been merged, so we can also just resolve this conversation.

>         on a schedule or based on a trigger or event?

Author: Thanks! That helps a lot more to understanding what you meant. And I wasn't going anywhere, I literally didn't understand what you were saying 😝 that's why I asked!

What if I wrote "conceptually or practically"? The conceptual part is important, because someone can conceptually *know* that computers can automate things, but not practically know how to implement it. Like we all conceptually know that we can structure data in a better way, but we don't fully know how that will be implemented. Some people don't even conceptually understand how computers work, so it would make no sense to talk to them about "automating things", when they will be like "what does that mean".

Good points about the question marks etc.

>         on a schedule or based on a trigger or event?

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
-   A general understanding of what "automation" means, such as:
    -   Conceptually understanding how a computer could perform a task for you instead
        of you doing it manually
    -   Conceptually understanding how a computer could perform a task for you on a
        schedule or based on a trigger or event
```

>         on a schedule or based on a trigger or event?

Reviewer: All good! I get it. I also wasn't sure...

I have made a suggestion that makes more sense to me here: https://github.com/seedcase-project/seedcase-project/pull/238/files/bcc515fdd5ede60ba998e178d641197f2624c5c9#r1616295199

-   A general familiarity with GitHub, including:
    -   Knowing what a Git repository means
    -   Navigating to a Git repository

>     -   Creating a new file ("adding")

Author: ```suggestion
    -   Creating a new file (called "adding" in Git)
```

>     -   Saving files ("committing")
>     -   Making edits to files ("committing")

Author: ```suggestion
    -   Making edits to files ("committing")
```

## Necessary software

-   No software is needed.
-   Need to have a GitHub account.

## Learning goal

> At the end of this, you will be able to describe what an Action is and
> some basic uses of it, as well as being able to create a simple
> Action.

## Take home messages

-   GitHub Actions are files with a list of instructions that the GitHub
    server uses to run to complete a set of tasks.
-   GitHub Actions are YAML files that must be placed in the
    `.github/workflows/` folder in a repository.

## Lesson content

### What is a GitHub Action?

At it's core, a [GitHub Action](https://github.com/features/actions) is
a set of instructions given to a server to run and complete a specific
sequence of tasks. Before we can continue though, we need to answer the
question: What is a server?

A server is just like the computer you are using right now to read this
lesson in your web browser, except that a server is a connected set of
thousands of computers usually kept somewhere in a big,
tightly-controlled and managed warehouse. Servers are very powerful,

> large "computers" that is used to run complex and intensive

Author: ```suggestion
large computers that is used to run complex and intensive
```

to GitHub to know about and use this file, it has to be kept in the
`.github/workflows/` folder of the repository and the file must be a
[YAML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML) file (ending in `.yml`):

```         
reponame/
└── .github/
    └── workflows/
        ├── action-name-1.yml
        └── action-name-2.yml
```

In the folder setup above, there are two Actions that GitHub will run:
`action-name-1` and `action-name-2`.

### General structure of a GitHub Action

GitHub Actions are generally structured and organized into distinct
sections:

1.  The trigger (`on`) section
2.  The permissions (`permissions`) section
3.  The jobs (`jobs`) section

There is also a starting `name` field to tell GitHub what the name or
title of the Action is, that is usually at the very top of the file.

#### `on` section

The `on` section tells GitHub when the Action should run. For instance,
to only run the Action when an Issue (like bug reports, questions to
ask, or tasks to do) is created (called "opened"), you write:

``` yaml
on:
  issues:
    type: opened
```

::: callout-tip
The way that commands are written as a shortened uses the `.` to

> separate each level. So for the one above, it would be `on.issues.type`.

Author: @signekb if you surround the suggestion with four back ticks (\`\`\`\`), you can include three backticks within.

In relation to your suggestion, no you can not use the shortened form within YAML. Only when it is referred to in documentation (and I guess in their internal code).

> The way that commands are written as a shortened uses the `.` to
> separate each level. So for the one above, it would be `on.issues.type`.

Author: ```suggestion
The way that commands are written in official documentation often uses a shortened form. So that a `.` is used to
separate each level. In the example above, in documentation it would be referred to as `on.issues.type`.
```

    instructions.

We'll start with the `on` section, as well as the `name` of the Action.
In this case, we want the Action to always run whenever you or someone
else pushes changes to the `main` branch of the repository. So we would
start with:

``` yaml
name: Build website
on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main
```

Because we want to GitHub to host the website on their GitHub Pages
service, which uses a special branch called `gh-pages` in the
repository, we need to give the Action some permissions to be able to
write to that branch. We'll add that by using the `permissions` section:

``` yaml
permissions: 
    contents: write
    pages: write
```

Next is the core part of the Action, the `jobs` section. Because we want
to build the contents of the repository using Quarto and then push to
the `gh-pages` branch, we need at least three steps:

1.  Downloading the contents of the repository into the GitHub server by
    checking out the repository.
2.  Installing Quarto in the server.
3.  Running Quarto on the repository contents to build the website and
    store the output in the branch called `gh-pages`.

Thankfully, we don't have to do all of these steps manually, since there

> already exists Actions that you can download and use, such as the

Author: Good point. And also, I made a small clarification, that we write workflows but can (re)use workflows, called actions, built by others.

`checkout` action provided by GitHub's `actions` account, along with the
`quarto-actions/setup` and `quarto-actions/publish` actions provided by

> the Quarto team in their `quarto-dev` GitHub account.

Reviewer: Can these be found in GitHub's marketplace? If yes, maybe add that as a source instead to keep things simple?

Author: They are not found in the marketplace, only from their repository.

> So we'll first set up the `jobs` section with the `name` and to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So we'll first set up the `jobs` section with a job named `build-deploy` that
```

`runs-on` the latest version of Ubuntu:

``` yaml
jobs:
  build-deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
```

Next is to start the `steps` for the job, first of which is to check out
the repository:

``` yaml
    steps:
      - name: Check out repository
        uses: actions/checkout@v4
```

> Note the use of `@4` to indicate the version of the `checkout` action to
> use. Next, we'll install Quarto:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the use of `@v4` to indicate that we use the fourth version of the 
`checkout` action. 

Next, we'll install Quarto:
```

``` yaml
      - name: Set up Quarto
        uses: quarto-dev/quarto-actions/setup@v2
```

> In this case, we need to provide the Quarto `setup` action (using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, we need to provide the Quarto `setup` action (using the second
```

version `v2`). Lastly, we want to run Quarto to build the website and
publish it to the `gh-pages` branch:

``` yaml
      - name: Publish to GitHub Pages (and render) 
        uses: quarto-dev/quarto-actions/publish@v2
        with:
          target: gh-pages
        env:
          GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }} 
```

Because we will be saving the built website to the `gh-pages` branch, we
need to specify the output location (using the `target` argument
accessible with the `with:` field) to be `gh-pages`. Saving to the
`gh-pages` branch requires using the `GITHUB_TOKEN` environment, which

> is found within the `secrets` object.

Reviewer: Maybe add a sentence on how one would know this? Is it documented where you found the action? Maybe on Marketplace? In examples found on the interweb?

> 

Reviewer: I find it very helpful to see scripts like this in their entirety. 

```suggestion

The action now look like this in it's entirety: 

``` yaml
name: Build website
on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main
permissions: 
    contents: write
    pages: write
jobs:
  build-deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Check out repository
        uses: actions/checkout@v4
        - name: Set up Quarto
        uses: quarto-dev/quarto-actions/setup@v2
        - name: Publish to GitHub Pages (and render) 
        uses: quarto-dev/quarto-actions/publish@v2
        with:
          target: gh-pages
        env:
          GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }} 

```
Again, bc of the backticks used for both the yaml block and the suggestion block, this suggestion is missing ` ``` ` in the end.

With these few lines of code, we now have a GitHub Action that will take

> the Markdown files within the repository can build them into a website!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Markdown files (`.qmd`) within the repository and build them into a website every time changes are pushed to the main branch of your repository!
```

## Summary

-   You can use GitHub's servers to run code or a series of tasks by

>     through their GitHub Actions feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    through the GitHub Actions feature.
```

> -   An Action is a `.yml` file that is found in the `.github/workflows/`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   An Action is a YAML file (`.yml` or `.yaml`) that is found in the `.github/workflows/`
```

    folder of a Git repository.

> -   One Action fil contains a list of instructions for the server to run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   One Action file contains a list of instructions for the server to run
```

    to complete specific tasks.
-   Within the `.github/workflows/` folder you can have many Actions
    doing many different things for you for the repository they are kept
    in.
-   There are three main sections to an Action: `on`, `permissions`, and
    `jobs`.
    -   The `on` section tells GitHub when the Action should run.
    -   The optional `permissions` section tells GitHub what extra

>         permissions the Action can have, if needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        permissions the Action can have, if needed. The default is that the action will have no permissions to read or write to files in the repository.
```

    -   The `jobs` section is where the actual instructions are listed
        that form the core of an Action. The `jobs` section is composed
        of its own set of subsections: `name`, `runs-on`, and `steps`.
    -   The `steps` sub-section of `jobs` is where the actual code-based
        instructions are put that tell GitHub what it should run. Each
        step is a separate item in the list and is composed of a few
        parts: `name`, `uses`, `with`, `env`, and `run`.

> -   There are a large number of pre-made Actions available from GitHub
>     and other sources that you can use in your own Actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   There are a large number of pre-made Actions available from GitHub on their [Marketplace](https://github.com/marketplace?type=actions) and other sources that you can use in your own Actions.
```
